I study ants in the desert in the
tropical forest and in my kitchen and in
the hills around Silicon Valley where I
live I've recently realized that ants
are using interactions differently in
different environments and that got me
thinking that we could learn from this
about other systems like brains and data
networks that we engineer and even
cancer so what all these systems have in
common is that there's no central
control an ant colony consists of
sterile female workers those are the
ants you see walking around and then one
or more reproductive females who just
lay the eggs they don't give any
instructions even though they're called
Queens they don't tell anybody what to
do so in an ant colony there's no one in
charge and all systems like this without
central control are regulated using very
simple interactions ants interact using
smell they smell with their antennae and
they interact with their antennae so
when one ant touches another with its
antennae it can tell for example if the
other ant is a nest mate and what tasks
that other ant has been doing so here
you see a lot of ants moving around and
interacting in a lab arena that's
connected by tubes to two other arenas
so when one ant meets another it doesn't
matter which ant it meets and they're
actually not transmitting any kind of
complicated signal or message all that
matters to the ant is the rate at which
it meets other ants and all of these
interactions taken together produce a
network so this is the network of the
ants that you just saw moving around in
the arena and it's this constantly
shifting network that produces the
behavior of the colony like whether all
the ants are hiding inside the nest or
how many are going out to forage a brain
actually works in the same way but
what's great about ants is that you can
see the whole network as it happens
there are more than 12,000 species of
ants in every conceivable environment
and they're using interactions
differently to meet different
environmental challenges so one
important environmental challenge that
every system has to deal with is
operating costs just what it takes to
run the system and another environmental
challenge is resources finding them and
collecting them in the desert operating
costs are high because water is scarce
and the seed eating ants that I study in
the desert have to spend water to get
water so an ant outside foraging
searching for seeds in the hot Sun just
loses water into the air but the colony
gets its water by metabolizing the fats
out of the seeds that they eat so in
this environment interactions are used
to activate foraging and outgoing
foragers doesn't go out unless it gets
enough interactions with returning
foragers and what you see are the
returning foragers going into the tunnel
into the nest and meeting outgoing
foragers on their way out this makes
sense for the ant colony because the
more food there is out there the more
quickly the foragers find it the faster
they come back and the more foragers
they send out the system works to stay
stopped
unless something positive happens so
interactions function to activate
foragers and we've been studying the
evolution of the system first of all
there's variation it turns out that
colonies are different on dry days some
colonies forage less so colonies are
different in how they manage this
trade-off between spending water to
search for seeds and getting water back
in the form of seeds and we're trying to
understand why some colonies forage less
than others by thinking about ants as
neurons using models from neuroscience
so just as a neuron adds up its
stimulation from other neurons to decide
whether to fire an ant adds up its
stimulation from other ants to decide
whether to forage and what we're looking
for is whether there might be small
differences among colonies and how many
interactions each ant needs before it's
willing to go out and forage because a
colony like that would forage less and
this raises an analogous question about
brain
we talked about the brain but of course
every brain is slightly different and
maybe there are some individuals or some
conditions in which the electrical
properties of neurons are such that they
require more stimulus to fire and that
would lead to differences in brain
function so in order to ask evolutionary
questions we need to know about
reproductive success this is a map of
the study site where I have been
tracking this population of harvester
ant colonies for 28 years which is about
as long as a colony lives each symbol is
a colony and the size of the symbol is
how many offspring had had because we
were able to use genetic variation to
match up parent and offspring colonies
that is to figure out which colonies
were founded by a daughter queen
produced by which parent colony and this
was amazing for me after all these years
to find out for example the colony 154
whom I've known well for many years is a
great-grandmother
here's her daughter colony here's her
granddaughter colony and these are her
great-granddaughter colonies and by
doing this I was able to learn that
offspring colonies resemble parent
colonies in their decisions about which
days are so hot that they don't forage
and the offspring and parent colonies
live so far from each other that the
ants never meet so the ants of the
offspring colony can't be learning this
from the parent colony and so our next
step is to look for the genetic
variation underlying this resemblance so
then I was able to ask ok who's doing
better over the time of the studying
especially in the past ten years there's
been a very severe and deepening drought
in the southwestern US and it turns out
that the colonies the conserve water
that stay in when it's really hot
outside and thus sacrifice getting as
much food as possible are the ones more
likely to have offspring colonies so all
this time I thought the colony 154 was a
loser because on really dry days there'd
be just this trickle of foraging while
the other colonies were out foraging
getting lots of food but in fact colony
154 is a huge success she's a matriarch
she's one of the rare
great-grandmother's on the site to my
knowledge this is the first time that
we've been able to track the ongoing
evolution of collective behavior in a
natural population of animals and find
out what's actually working best now the
internet uses an algorithm to regulate
the flow of data that's very similar to
the one that the harvester ants are
using to regulate the flow of foragers
and guess what we call this analogy the
ant ernet is coming yeah so data doesn't
leave the source computer unless it gets
a signal that there's enough bandwidth
for it to travel on in the early days of
the internet when operating costs were
really high and it was really important
not to lose any data then the system was
set up for interactions to activate the
flow of data it's interesting that the
ants are using an algorithm that's so
similar to one that we recently invented
but this is only one of a handful of ant
algorithms that we know about and ants
have had a hundred and thirty million
years to evolve a lot of good ones and I
think it's very likely that some of the
other 12,000 species are going to have
interesting algorithms for data networks
that we haven't even thought of yet so
what happens when operating costs are
low operating costs are low in the
tropics because it's very humid and it's
easy for the ants to be outside walking
around but the ants are so abundant and
diverse in the tropics that there's a
lot of competition whatever resource one
species is using another species is
likely to be using that at the same time
so in this environment interactions are
used in the opposite way the system
keeps going unless something negative
happens and one species that I study
makes circuits in the trees of foraging
ants going from the nest to food source
and back just round and round
unless something negative happens like
an interaction with ants of another
species so here's an example of ant
security in the middle there's an ant
plugging the nest entrance with its head
in response to interactions with another
species those are the little ones
running around with their abdomens up in
the air but as soon as the threat has
passed the entrance is open again and
maybe there are situations in computer
security where operating costs are low
enough that we could just block access
temporarily
in response to an immediate threat and
then open it again instead of trying to
build a permanent firewall or fortress
so another environmental challenge that
all systems have to deal with is
resources finding and collecting them
and to do this and solve the problem of
collective search and this is a problem
that's of great interest right now in
robotics because we've understood that
rather than sending a single
sophisticated expensive robot out to
explore another planet or to search a
burning building that instead it may be
more effective to get a group of Cheaper
robots exchanging only minimal
information and that's the way that ants
do it
so the invasive Argentine ant makes
expandable search networks they're good
at dealing with the main problem of
collective search which is the trade-off
between searching very thoroughly and
covering a lot of ground and what they
do is when there are many ants in a
small space then each one can search
very thoroughly because there'll be
another ant nearby searching over there
but when there are a few ants in a large
space then they need to stretch out
their paths to cover more ground I think
that they use interactions to assess
density so when they're really crowded
they meet more often and they search
more thoroughly different ant species
must use different algorithms because
they've evolved to deal with different
resources and it could be really useful
to know about this and so we recently
asked ants to solve the collective
search problem in the extreme
environment of microgravity in the
international space station when I first
saw this picture I thought oh no they've
mounted the habitat vertically but then
I realized that of course it doesn't
matter so the idea here
is that the ants are working so hard to
hang on to the wall or the floor or
whatever you call it that they're less
likely to interact and so the
relationship between how crowded they
are and how often they meet would be
messed up we're still analyzing the data
I don't have the results yet but it
would be interesting to know how other
species solve this problem on in
different environments on earth and so
we're setting up a program to encourage
kids around the world to try this
experiment with different species it's
very simple it can be done with cheap
materials and that way we could make a
global map of ant collective search
algorithms and I think it's pretty
likely that the invasive species the
ones that come into our buildings are
gonna be really good at this because
they're in your kitchen because they're
really good at finding food and water so
the most familiar resource for ants is a
picnic and this is a clustered resource
when there's one piece of fruit there's
likely to be another piece of food
nearby
and the ants that specialize on
clustered resources use interactions for
recruitment so when one ant meets
another or when it meets a chemical
deposited on the ground by another then
it changes direction to follow in the
direction of the interaction and that's
how you get the trail of ants sharing
your picnic now this is a place where I
think we might be able to learn
something from ants about cancer first
it's obvious that we could do a lot to
prevent cancer by not allowing people to
spread around or sell the toxins that
promote the evolution of cancer in our
bodies but I don't think the ants can
help us much with this because ants
never poison their own colonies but we
might be able to learn something from
ants about treating cancer there are
many different kinds of cancer each one
originates in a particular part of the
body and then some kinds of cancer will
spread or metastasize to particular
other tissues where they must be getting
resources that they need so if you think
from the perspective of early metastatic
cancer cells as they're out searching
around for the resources that they need
if those resources are clustered they're
likely to use interactions for
recruitment and if we can figure out how
cancer cell
recruiting then maybe we could set traps
to catch them before they become
established
so ants are using interactions in
different ways in a huge variety of
environments and we could learn from
this about other systems that operate
without central control using only
simple interactions ant colonies have
been performing amazing feats for more
than a hundred and thirty million years
we have a lot to learn from them thank
you
[Applause]